Revised light clients section (#1509)
substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs: content/md/en/docs/fundamentals/light-clients-in-substrate-connect.md

---

> title:  Light clients and Substrate Connect
> description: Use a light client and Substrate Connect to enable your applications to interact with any Substrate-based chain.

Reviewer: This is same as said in closed PR. This is meant to replace substrate connect documentation, so IMO it would be better to have something like:
```suggestion
title:  Substrate Connect
description: Use Substrate Connect, which integrates Smoldot light client,  to enable your applications to interact with any Substrate-based chain.
```

keywords:
  - Substrate Connect

>   - light client node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - light client node
  - Smoldot light client
```

With a light client node, you can interact with a blockchain in a secure and decentralized way without investing in the high-powered hardware and network capacity that running a full node would require.

## Light clients in the JavaScript ecosystem

For Substrate-based chains, the light client node is implemented as a WebAssembly client—called `smoldot`—that can run in a browser and interact with the chain using JSON-RPC calls.
To make the `smoldot` WebAssembly light client easier to integrate with JavaScript and TypeScript applications, there's a JavaScript package that's built on top of the `smoldot` source called Substrate Connect.

Substrate Connect is available as a Node.js package that can be installed with the `npm` package manager.
The Substrate Connect package enables the light client node to be integrated with applications in the JavaScript ecosystem. 
After adding Substrate Connect to an application, the application can communicate with the light client—and access blockchain data—through JSON-RPC messages.

## Connect to the blockchain directly from a browser

> With Substrate Connect, you can turn a browser running locally into a node on the blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Substrate Connect, you can activate your DApp to run a light client node inside your local running browser.
```

From the browser, application users can interact with blockchains directly—without connecting to any third-party  nodes or other servers.

By eliminating the need for intermediary servers, Substrate Connect provides benefits to blockchain builders, application developers, and end users.
A few of the key benefits include:

- improved security
- simplified network infrastructure
- lowered maintenance costs
- easier onboarding for novice blockchain users
- faster path to adoption for Web3 applications

## Blockchain networks with well-known names

You can use Substrate Connect to connect to any Substrate-based blockchain.
However, you must specify the correct name of the chain that you want to connect to.
There are a few well-known chain names that are defned for the [`WellKnownChain`](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate-connect/api/enums/connect_src.WellKnownChain.html) enumeration type.

You can connect to the following public blockchain networks using the name listed:

> | To connect to this chain | Use this chain name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| To connect to this chain | Use this chain id
```

| :----------------------- | :------------------
| [Polkadot](https://polkadot.network/) | `polkadot`

> | [Kusama](https://kusama.network/) | `ksmc33`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Kusama](https://kusama.network/) | `ksmcc3`
```

await api.rpc.chain.subscribeNewHeads((lastHeader) => {
console.log(lastHeader.hash);
});
await api.disconnect();
```

### Use the RPC provider to connect to a parachain

The following example illustrates how you can use the `rpc-provider` to connect to a parachain by specifying its chain specification.

```js
import { ScProvider, WellKnownChain } from '@polkadot/rpc-provider/substrate-connect';
import { ApiPromise } from '@polkadot/api';
import jsonParachainSpec from './jsonParachainSpec.json';
// Create the provider for the relay chain
const relayProvider = new ScProvider(WellKnownChain.westend2);
// Create the provider for the parachain. Notice that
// we must pass the provider of the relay chain as the
// second argument
const parachainSpec = JSON.stringify(jsonParachainSpec);
const provider = new ScProvider(parachainSpec, relayProvider);
// Stablish the connection (and catch possible errors)
await provider.connect()
// Create the PolkadotJS api instance
const api = await ApiPromise.create({ provider });
await api.rpc.chain.subscribeNewHeads((lastHeader) => {
console.log(lastHeader.hash);
});
await api.disconnect();
```

## Use Substrate Connect with other libraries

> The previous section demonstrated how to add the Substrate Connect provider to applications that use the Polkadot-JS API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous section demonstrated how to integrate the Substrate Connect provider to applications that use the Polkadot-JS API. 
```

}
);
// send a RpcRequest
chain.sendJsonRpc(
'{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":"1","method":"system_health","params":[]}'
);
```

### Connect to a parachain

The following example illustrates how you can use Substrate Connect to connect to a parachain.

```js
import { WellKnownChain, createScClient } from '@substrate/connect';
import jsonParachainSpec from './jsonParachainSpec.json';
// Create the client
const client = createScClient();
// Create the relay chain connection. There is no need to pass a callback
// function because we will sending and receiving messages through
// the parachain connection.
await client.addWellKnownChain(WellKnownChain.westend2);
// Create the parachain connection.
const parachainSpec = JSON.stringify(jsonParachainSpec);
const chain = await client.addChain(
parachainSpec,
function jsonRpcCallback(response) {
console.log('response', response);
}
);
// send a request
chain.sendJsonRpc(
'{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":"1","method":"system_health","params":[]}'
);
```

## API Documentation

For more information about the substrate-connect API, see [Substrate Connect](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate-connect/api/).

## Browser extension

> Substrate Connect provides a browser extension for the @substrate/light client node that allows the light client to run inside the extension instead of within the context of every browser tab. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Substrate Connect provides a browser extension for the @substrate/light client node that allows the Smoldot light client to run inside the extension instead of within the context of every browser tab. 
```

The extension also allows the light client node to keep synchronizing with the blockchain as long as the browser window stays open. 
You can download the Chrome and Firefox extensions from [Substrate Connect](https://substrate.io/developers/substrate-connect/) or find more information on the [Github repo](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate-connect/tree/main/projects/extension).

## Example projects

* [Burnr](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate-connect/burnr/)
  
  Insecure redeemable wallet: A light-client-based, in-browser wallet for Substrate. 
  It's meant to be quick and easy to use but less secure than other solutions. 
  [Github](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate-connect/tree/main/projects/burnr)

* [Multi-demo](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate-connect/demo/) 
  
  Simple demo that covers multichain and parachain examples.
  [Github](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate-connect/tree/main/projects/demo)

> * [Smol-ads](https://paritytech.github.io/smoldot-ads/) 
>   
>   Classified Ads demo.
>   [Github](https://github.com/paritytech/smoldot-ads/)

Reviewer: We have deprecated Smol-ads
```suggestion
```
